Sir Thurio, give us leave,I pray, awhile;
We have some secrets toconfer about.
Now, tell me, Proteus,what's your will with me?
My gracious lord, thatwhich I would discover
The law of friendship bidsme to conceal;
But when I call to mindyour gracious favours
Done to me, undeserving asI am,
My duty pricks me on toutter that
Which else no worldly goodshould draw from me.
Know, worthy prince, SirValentine, my friend,
This night intends tosteal away your daughter:
Myself am one made privyto the plot.
I know you have determinedto bestow her
On Thurio, whom yourgentle daughter hates;
And should she thus bestol'n away from you,
It would be much vexationto your age.
Thus, for my duty's sake,I rather chose
To cross my friend in hisintended drift
Than, by concealing it,heap on your head
A pack of sorrows whichwould press you down,
Being unprevented, to yourtimeless grave.
Proteus, I thank thee forthine honest care;
Which to requite, commandme while I live.
This love of theirs myselfhave often seen,
Haply when they havejudged me fast asleep,
And oftentimes havepurposed to forbid
Sir Valentine her companyand my court:
But fearing lest myjealous aim might err
And so unworthily disgracethe man,
A rashness that I ever yethave shunn'd,
I gave him gentle looks,thereby to find
That which thyself hastnow disclosed to me.
And, that thou maystperceive my fear of this,
I nightly lodge her in anupper tower,
The key whereof myselfhave ever kept;
And thence she cannot beconvey'd away.
Know, noble lord, theyhave devised a mean
How he her chamber-windowwill ascend
And with a corded ladderfetch her down;
For which the youthfullover now is gone
And this way comes he withit presently;
Where, if it please you,you may intercept him.
But, good my Lord, do itso cunningly
That my discovery be notaimed at;
For love of you, not hateunto my friend,
Hath made me publisher ofthis pretence.
Upon mine honour, he shallnever know
That I had any light fromthee of this.
Adieu, my Lord; SirValentine is coming.
Sir Valentine, whitheraway so fast?
Please it your grace,there is a messenger
That stays to bear myletters to my friends,
And I am going to deliverthem.
Be they of much import?
The tenor of them doth butsignify
My health and happy beingat your court.
Nay then, no matter; staywith me awhile;
I am to break with thee ofsome affairs
That touch me near, whereinthou must be secret.
'Tis not unknown to theethat I have sought
To match my friend SirThurio to my daughter.
I know it well, my Lord;and, sure, the match
Were rich and honourable;besides, the gentleman
Is full of virtue, bounty,worth and qualities
Beseeming such a wife asyour fair daughter:
Cannot your Grace win herto fancy him?
No, trust me; she ispeevish, sullen, froward,
Proud, disobedient,stubborn, lacking duty,
Neither regarding that sheis my child
Nor fearing me as if Iwere her father;
And, may I say to thee,this pride of hers,
Upon advice, hath drawn mylove from her;
And, where I thought theremnant of mine age
Should have been cherish'dby her child-like duty,
I now am full resolved totake a wife
And turn her out to whowill take her in:
Then let her beauty be herwedding-dower;
For me and my possessionsshe esteems not.
What would your Grace haveme to do in this?
There is a lady in cityhere
Whom I affect; but she isnice and coy
And nought esteems my agedeloquence:
For long agone I haveforgot to court;
Besides, the fashion ofthe time is changed--
Now therefore, when I have theeto my tutor
How and which way I maybestow myself
To be regarded in hersun-bright eye.
Win her with gifts, if sherespect not words:
Dumb jewels often in theirsilent kind
More than quick words domove a woman's mind.
But she did scorn apresent that I sent her.
A woman sometimes scornswhat best contents her.
Send her another; nevergive her o'er;
For scorn at first makesafter-love the more.
If she do frown, 'tis notin hate of you,
But rather to beget morelove in you:
If she do chide, 'tis notto have you gone;
For why, the fools aremad, if left alone.
Take no repulse, whatevershe doth say;
For 'get you gone,' shedoth not mean 'away!'
Flatter and praise, commend,extol their graces;
Though ne'er so black, saythey have angels' faces.
That man that hath atongue, I say, is no man,
If with his tongue hecannot win a woman.
But she I mean is promisedby her friends
Unto a youthful gentlemanof worth,
And kept severely fromresort of men,
That no man hath access byday to her.
Why, then, I would resortto her by night.
Ay, but the doors belock'd and keys kept safe,
That no man hath recourseto her by night.
What lets but one mayenter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, farfrom the ground,
And built so shelving thatone cannot climb it
Without apparent hazard ofhis life.
Why then, a ladderquaintly made of cords,
To cast up, with a pair ofanchoring hooks,
Would serve to scaleanother Hero's tower,
So bold Leander wouldadventure it.
Now, as thou art agentleman of blood,
Advise me where I may havesuch a ladder.
When would you use it?pray, sir, tell me that.
This very night; for Loveis like a child,
That longs for every thingthat he can come by.
By seven o'clock I'll getyou such a ladder.
But, hark thee; I will goto her alone:
How shall I best conveythe ladder thither?
It will be light, my lord,that you may bear it
Under a cloak that is ofany length.
A cloak as long as thinewill serve the turn?
Ay, my good lord.
Then let me see thy cloak:
I'll get me one of suchanother length.
Why, any cloak will servethe turn, my lord.
How shall I fashion me towear a cloak?
Let me feelthy cloak upon me.
What letter is this same?What's here? 'To Silvia'!
And here an engine fit formy proceeding.
I'll be so bold to breakthe seal for once.
'My thoughts do harbourwith my Silvia nightly,
And slaves they are to methat send them flying:
O, could their master comeand go as lightly,
Himself would lodge wheresenseless they are lying!
My herald thoughts in thypure bosom rest them:
While I, their king, thathither them importune,
Do curse the grace that withsuch grace hath bless'd them,
Because myself do want myservants' fortune:
I curse myself, for theyare sent by me,
That they should harbourwhere their lord would be.'
What's here?
'Silvia, this night I willenfranchise thee.'
'Tis so; and here's theladder for the purpose.
Why, Phaeton,--for thouart Merops' son,--
Wilt thou aspire to guidethe heavenly car
And with thy daring follyburn the world?
Wilt thou reach stars,because they shine on thee?
Go, base intruder!overweening slave!
Bestow thy fawning smileson equal mates,
And think my patience,more than thy desert,
Is privilege for thydeparture hence:
Thank me for this morethan for all the favours
Which all too much I havebestow'd on thee.
But if thou linger in myterritories
Longer than swiftestexpedition
Will give thee time toleave our royal court,
By heaven! my wrath shallfar exceed the love
I ever bore my daughter orthyself.
Be gone! I will not hearthy vain excuse;
But, as thou lovest thylife, make speed from hence.
And why not death ratherthan living torment?
To die is to be banish'dfrom myself;
And Silvia is myself:banish'd from her
Is self from self: adeadly banishment!
What light is light, ifSilvia be not seen?
What joy is joy, if Silviabe not by?
Unless it be to think thatshe is by
And feed upon the shadowof perfection
Except I be by Silvia inthe night,
There is no music in thenightingale;
Unless I look on Silvia inthe day,
There is no day for me tolook upon;
She is my essence, and Ileave to be,
If I be not by her fairinfluence
Foster'd, illumined,cherish'd, kept alive.
I fly not death, to flyhis deadly doom:
Tarry I here, I but attendon death:
But, fly I hence, I flyaway from life.
Run, boy, run, run, andseek him out.
Soho, soho!
What does't thou see?
Him that we seek: there'snot a hair on's head
but 'tis a Valentine.
Valentine?
No.
Who then? his spirit?
Neither.
What then?
Nothing.
Can nothing speak? Master,shall I strike?
Who wouldst thou strike?
Nothing.
Villain, forbear.
Why, sir, I'll strikenothing: I pray you,--
Sirrah, I say, forbear.Friend Valentine, a word.
My ears are stopt andcannot hear good news,
So much of bad alreadyhath possess'd them.
Then in dumb silence willI bury mine,
For they are harsh,untuneable and bad.
Is Silvia dead?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine, indeed, forsacred Silvia.
Hath she forsworn me?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine, if Silviahave forsworn me.
What is your news?
Sir, there is a proclamationthat you are vanished.
That thou art banished--O,that's the news!--
From hence, from Silviaand from me thy friend.
O, I have fed upon thiswoe already,
And now excess of it willmake me surfeit.
Doth Silvia know that I ambanished?
Ay, ay; and she hathoffer'd to the doom--
Which, unreversed, standsin effectual force--
A sea of melting pearl,which some call tears:
Those at her father'schurlish feet she tender'd;
With them, upon her knees,her humble self;
Wringing her hands, whosewhiteness so became them
As if but now they waxedpale for woe:
But neither bended knees,pure hands held up,
Sad sighs, deep groans,nor silver-shedding tears,
Could penetrate heruncompassionate sire;
But Valentine, if he beta'en, must die.
Besides, her intercessionchafed him so,
When she for thy repealwas suppliant,
That to close prison hecommanded her,
With many bitter threatsof biding there.
No more; unless the nextword that thou speak'st
Have some malignant powerupon my life:
If so, I pray thee,breathe it in mine ear,
As ending anthem of myendless dolour.
Cease to lament for thatthou canst not help,
And study help for thatwhich thou lament'st.
Time is the nurse andbreeder of all good.
Here if thou stay, thoucanst not see thy love;
Besides, thy staying willabridge thy life.
Hope is a lover's staff;walk hence with that
And manage it againstdespairing thoughts.
Thy letters may be here,though thou art hence;
Which, being writ to me,shall be deliver'd
Even in the milk-whitebosom of thy love.
The time now serves not toexpostulate:
Come, I'll convey theethrough the city-gate;
And, ere I part with thee,confer at large
Of all that may concernthy love-affairs.
As thou lovest Silvia,though not for thyself,
Regard thy danger, andalong with me!
I pray thee, Launce, an ifthou seest my boy,
Bid him make haste andmeet me at the North-gate.
Go, sirrah, find him out.Come, Valentine.
O my dear Silvia! HaplessValentine!
I am but a fool;
and yet I have the wit to thinkmy master is a kind of a knave:
but that's all one, ifhe be but one knave.
He lives not now thatknows me to be in love;
yet I am in love;
but a team of horse shallnot pluck that from me;
nor who 'tis I love; and yet'tis a woman; but what woman,
I will not tell myself;and yet 'tis a milkmaid;
yet 'tis not a maid, forshe hath had gossips;
yet 'tis a maid, for sheis her master's maid,
and serves for wages.
She hath more qualitiesthan a water-spaniel;
which is much in abare Christian.
Here is the cate-log ofher condition.
'Imprimis: She canfetch and carry.'
Why, a horse can do no more:nay, a horse cannot fetch,
but only carry; thereforeis she better than a jade.
'Item: She can milk;' lookyou, a sweet virtue in a maid
with clean hands.
How now, Signior Launce! whatnews with your mastership?
With my master's ship?why, it is at sea.
Well, your old vicestill; mistake the word.
What news, then,in your paper?
The blackest news thatever thou heardest.
Why, man, how black?
Why, as black as ink.
Let me read them.
Fie on thee, jolt-head!thou canst not read.
Thou liest; I can.
I will try thee. Tell methis: who begot thee?
Marry, the son of mygrandfather.
O illiterate loiterer! it wasthe son of thy grandmother:
this proves that thoucanst not read.
Come, fool, come; try mein thy paper.
There; and St. Nicholas bethy speed!
'Imprimis: She can milk.'
Ay, that she can.
'Item: She brews goodale.'
And thereof comes the proverb:
'Blessing of your heart,you brew good ale.'
Item: She can sew.'
That's as much as to say,Can she so?
'Item: She can knit.'
What need a man care fora stock with a wench,
when she can knithim a stock?
'Item: She can wash andscour.'
A special virtue:
for then she need notbe washed and scoured.
'Item: She can spin.'
Then may I set theworld on wheels,
when she can spinfor her living.
'Item: She hath manynameless virtues.'
That's as much as tosay, bastard virtues;
that, indeed, knownot their fathers
and therefore haveno names.
'Here follow her vices.'
Close at the heels of hervirtues.
'Item: She is not tobe kissed fasting
in respect ofher breath.'
Well, that fault may be mendedwith a breakfast. Read on.
'Item: She hath a sweetmouth.'
That makes amends for hersour breath.
'Item: She doth talk inher sleep.'
It's no matter for that, soshe sleep not in her talk.
'Item: She is slow in words.'
O villain, that set thisdown among her vices!
To be slow in words isa woman's only virtue:
I pray thee, out with't, andplace it for her chief virtue.
'Item: She is proud.'
Out with that too; itwas Eve's legacy,
and cannot beta'en from her.
'Item: She hath no teeth.'
I care not for that neither,because I love crusts.
'Item: She is curst.'
Well, the best is, shehath no teeth to bite.
'Item: She will oftenpraise her liquor.'
If her liquor be good, sheshall: if she will not, I will;
for good thingsshould be praised.
'Item: She is tooliberal.'
Of her tongue she cannot be,
for that's writ downshe is slow of;
of her purse she shall not,for that I'll keep shut:
now, of another thing shemay, and that cannot I help.
Well, proceed.
'Item: She hath morehair than wit,
and more faults than hairs,and more wealth than faults.'
Stop there; I'll have her:she was mine, and not mine,
twice or thrice inthat last article.
Rehearse that once more.
'Item: She hath more hairthan wit,'--
More hair than wit? Itmay be; I'll prove it.
The cover of the salt hidesthe salt, and therefore
it is more than the salt; thehair that covers the wit
is more than the wit, forthe greater hides the less.
What's next?
'And more faults thanhairs,'--
That's monstrous: O, thatthat were out!
'And more wealth thanfaults.'
Why, that word makesthe faults gracious.
Well, I'll have her;and if it be a match,
as nothing is impossible,--
What then?
Why, then will I tellthee--that thy master stays
for thee at theNorth-gate.
For me?
For thee! ay, who art thou?
he hath stayed for abetter man than thee.
And must I go to him?
Thou must run to him, forthou hast stayed so long
that going will scarceserve the turn.
Why didst not tell me sooner?pox of your love letters!
Now will he be swingedfor reading my letter;
an unmannerly slave, that willthrust himself into secrets!
I'll after, to rejoice inthe boy's correction.
Sir Thurio, fear not butthat she will love you,
Now Valentine is banish'dfrom her sight.
Since his exile she hathdespised me most,
Forsworn my company andrail'd at me,
That I am desperate ofobtaining her.
This weak impress of loveis as a figure
Trenched in ice, whichwith an hour's heat
Dissolves to water anddoth lose his form.
A little time will melther frozen thoughts
And worthless Valentineshall be forgot.
How now, Sir Proteus! Isyour countryman
According to ourproclamation gone?
Gone, my good lord.
My daughter takes hisgoing grievously.
A little time, my lord,will kill that grief.
So I believe; but Thuriothinks not so.
Proteus, the good conceitI hold of thee--
For thou hast shown somesign of good desert--
Makes me the better toconfer with thee.
Longer than I prove loyalto your grace
Let me not live to lookupon your grace.
Thou know'st how willinglyI would effect
The match between SirThurio and my daughter.
I do, my lord.
And also, I think, thouart not ignorant
How she opposes heragainst my will
She did, my lord, whenValentine was here.
Ay, and perversely shepersevers so.
What might we do to makethe girl forget
The love of Valentine andlove Sir Thurio?
The best way is to slanderValentine
With falsehood, cowardiceand poor descent,
Three things that womenhighly hold in hate.
Ay, but she'll think thatit is spoke in hate.
Ay, if his enemy deliverit:
Therefore it must withcircumstance be spoken
By one whom she esteemethas his friend.
Then you must undertake toslander him.
And that, my lord, I shallbe loath to do:
'Tis an ill office for agentleman,
Especially against hisvery friend.
Where your good wordcannot advantage him,
Your slander never canendamage him;
Therefore the office isindifferent,
Being entreated to it byyour friend.
You have prevail'd, mylord; if I can do it
By ought that I can speakin his dispraise,
She shall not longcontinue love to him.
But say this weed her lovefrom Valentine,
It follows not that shewill love Sir Thurio.
Therefore, as you unwindher love from him,
Lest it should ravel andbe good to none,
You must provide to bottomit on me;
Which must be done bypraising me as much
As you in worth dispraiseSir Valentine.
And, Proteus, we daretrust you in this kind,
Because we know, onValentine's report,
You are already Love'sfirm votary
And cannot soon revolt andchange your mind.
Upon this warrant shallyou have access
Where you with Silvia mayconfer at large;
For she is lumpish, heavy,melancholy,
And, for your friend'ssake, will be glad of you;
Where you may temper herby your persuasion
To hate young Valentineand love my friend.
As much as I can do, Iwill effect:
But you, Sir Thurio, arenot sharp enough;
You must lay lime totangle her desires
By wailful sonnets, whosecomposed rhymes
Should be full-fraughtwith serviceable vows.
Ay,
Much is the force ofheaven-bred poesy.
Say that upon the altar ofher beauty
You sacrifice your tears,your sighs, your heart:
Write till your ink bedry, and with your tears
Moist it again, and framesome feeling line
That may discover suchintegrity:
For Orpheus' lute wasstrung with poets' sinews,
Whose golden touch couldsoften steel and stones,
Make tigers tame and hugeleviathans
Forsake unsounded deeps todance on sands.
After your dire-lamentingelegies,
Visit by night your lady'schamber-window
With some sweet concert;to their instruments
Tune a deploring dump: thenight's dead silence
Will well become suchsweet-complaining grievance.
This, or else nothing,will inherit her.
This discipline shows thouhast been in love.
And thy advice this nightI'll put in practise.
Therefore, sweet Proteus,my direction-giver,
Let us into the citypresently
To sort some gentlemenwell skill'd in music.
I have a sonnet that willserve the turn
To give the onset to thygood advice.
About it, gentlemen!
We'll wait upon your gracetill after supper,
And afterward determineour proceedings.
Even now about it! I willpardon you.